feat: add `no-useless-assignment` rule (#17625)
eslint/eslint: docs/src/rules/no-useless-assignment.md

---
title: no-useless-assignment
rule_type: suggestion
related_rules:
- no-unused-vars

> ---

Reviewer: Let's make sure to include more references for people. See the links in https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/17559#issuecomment-1732598182

We can use the "further_reading" key to list these out.

> If the variable is not used after assignment is needless and most likely indicates that there is some behavior that the author wanted but didn't correctly do.

Reviewer: We definitely need more of a description here. We need to explain the concept of a "dead store" and why it's a problem. We also need to show an example and explain it.

    if (condition) {
        v = 'unused';
        return
    }
    doSomething(v);
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        doSomething(v);
    } else {
        v = 'unused';
    }
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'unused';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'used';
        doSomething(v);
        return
    }
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        let v = 'used';
        console.log(v);
        v = 'unused';
    }
    console.log(v);
}
```

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```js
/* eslint no-useless-assignment: "error" */

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    doSomething(v);
    v = 'used-2';
    doSomething(v);
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'used-2';
        doSomething(v);
        return
    }
    doSomething(v);
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        doSomething(v);
    } else {
        v = 'used-2';
        doSomething(v);
    }
}

function foo () {
    let v = 'used';
    for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        doSomething(v);
        v = 'used in next iteration';
    }
}
```

:::

## When Not To Use It

> If you don't want to be notified about unnecessary arguments, you can safely turn this rule off.

Reviewer: Looks like a copy-paste error here.

```suggestion
If you don't want to be notified about values that are never read, you can safely disable this rule.
```

> In computer programming, a local variable that is assigned a value but is not read by any subsequent instruction is referred to as a **dead store**.

"Dead stores" waste processing and memory, so it is better to remove unnecessary assignments to variables.

Also, if the author intended the variable to be used, there is likely a mistake around the dead store.

## Rule Details

This rule aims to report variable assignments when the value is not used.

Examples of **incorrect** code for this rule:

::: incorrect

```js
/* eslint no-useless-assignment: "error" */

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    doSomething(v);
    v = 'unused';
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'unused';
        return
    }
    doSomething(v);
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        doSomething(v);
    } else {
        v = 'unused';
    }
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'unused';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'used';
        doSomething(v);
        return
    }
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        let v = 'used';
        console.log(v);
        v = 'unused';
    }
    console.log(v);
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: As it is now, the code in this example cannot be parsed in the Playground with the default `{ "sourceType": "module" }` because of the duplicated function name `foo` ([see here](https://eslint.org/play/#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)). This can be easily fixed by giving the functions unique names. That's what we did in https://github.com/eslint/eslint/pull/17633/files in other places. Since this is a new rule, it would be good to have the examples working in the Playground right from the start.

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```js
/* eslint no-useless-assignment: "error" */

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    doSomething(v);
    v = 'used-2';
    doSomething(v);
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'used-2';
        doSomething(v);
        return
    }
    doSomething(v);
}

function foo() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        doSomething(v);
    } else {
        v = 'used-2';
        doSomething(v);
    }
}

function foo () {
    let v = 'used';
    for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        doSomething(v);
        v = 'used in next iteration';
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Same as above, the function names in this code block should be unique.

}

function fn2() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'unused';
        return
    }
    doSomething(v);
}

function fn3() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        doSomething(v);
    } else {
        v = 'unused';
    }
}

function fn4() {
    let v = 'unused';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'used';
        doSomething(v);
        return
    }
}

function fn5() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        let v = 'used';
        console.log(v);
        v = 'unused';
    }
    console.log(v);
}
```

:::

Examples of **correct** code for this rule:

::: correct

```js
/* eslint no-useless-assignment: "error" */

function fn1() {
    let v = 'used';
    doSomething(v);
    v = 'used-2';
    doSomething(v);
}

function fn2() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        v = 'used-2';
        doSomething(v);
        return
    }
    doSomething(v);
}

function fn3() {
    let v = 'used';
    if (condition) {
        doSomething(v);
    } else {
        v = 'used-2';
        doSomething(v);
    }
}

function fn4() {
    let v = 'used';
    for (let i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        doSomething(v);
        v = 'used in next iteration';
    }
}
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

:::

```

To close `::: correct`.

Author: Thank you!

rule_type: suggestion
related_rules:
- no-unused-vars
further_reading:
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_store

> - https://www.npmjs.com/package/eslint-plugin-no-useless-assign

Reviewer: I think we can leave this off. We generally don't point to other plugins that do the same thing.

- https://sonarsource.atlassian.net/browse/RSPEC-1854
- https://rules.sonarsource.com/javascript/RSPEC-1854/

> - https://rules.sonarsource.com/typescript/RSPEC-1854/

Reviewer: The previous three lines all basically point to the same information. I'd suggest we keep just the second one, which is JavaScript-specific.

- https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/563.html
- https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/display/c/MSC13-C.+Detect+and+remove+unused+values
- https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/display/java/MSC56-J.+Detect+and+remove+superfluous+code+and+values
---

[Wikipedia describes a "dead store"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_store) as follows:

> In computer programming, a local variable that is assigned a value but is not read by any subsequent instruction is referred to as a **dead store**.

"Dead stores" waste processing and memory, so it is better to remove unnecessary assignments to variables.

> Also, if the author intended the variable to be used, there is likely a mistake around the dead store.

Reviewer: We still need more in this section. Please show an example.

"Dead stores" waste processing and memory, so it is better to remove unnecessary assignments to variables.

Also, if the author intended the variable to be used, there is likely a mistake around the dead store.

> For example,

Reviewer: Sorry, I don't think I was clear. I'm looking for a code example in this section, something like:

```js
let id = "x1234";    // this is a "dead store" - this value is never read

id = generateId();

doSomethingWith(id);
```

That way, we can explain that `"x1234"` is a value that can't possibly be used, and then we say this type of error can occur while refactoring.
